

narrative outline

what little story there is in about-face is meant to explore the sense of split identity - being caught between two worlds.  the feeling of whiplash and not knowing how to define yourself after abrupt changes in circumstances.  not knowing which part of yourself to hold on or let go, having to move on pretending as if certain things didn't happen - as if certain parts of you never were.

this is obviously autobiographical.


the most recent and pressing split is from going ALL IN on indie game dev to just living at my mom's house....

starving artist / unemployed / salary man
near success / total failure
workaholic / unemployed slacker
ambition and dreams / apathy


before that, and the experience which really inspired this narrative, was the move back from china....

completely independent / financially dependent
incredibly busy fast paced job and life / doing nothing
"zany" girlfriend and close friends / no social life
living in a huge foreign city, every day is a challenge / calm suburbs
the exotic "foreigner" / a local
Le Studdo / Patrick


during my time in china, the split between my job and my game dev....

aspirations and dreams, workaholism / mundane job people take to avoid real work
technical qualifications and big goals / being the "entertainer" (not real teacher) that is equal parts resented and ignored
BK201 / Pat


and the final split....
depression / anxiety



Basically, as I've moved around and done all this weird crazy stuff to chase after some pipedream, I've had to adapt to a lot of different situations and take on different roles and personas.  Often times, the change is abrupt and difficult, and has a weird sensation of playing with sense of self...


I think the game starts out with our protagonist, Square, setting out on a journey somewhere far away.  The first text you see is HOME.  At this point in the game, you can jump but the world does not invert.  Basic platforming mechanics are taught.  The player is then confronted with a gap they can only cross by inverting the world - some sort of pickup allows them to do so.  The Animus makes its first appearance here, but has little to say.

With the inverting mechanic introduced, puzzles may commence.  For the early portions, texts suggest splits between big goals and day to day life, with the white side being an optimistic, forward-looking setting, and the black side being a more pessimistic, past/present-looking setting.

Aroud the time that the double-jump mechanic is enabled/introduced, there is suggestion of crossing a threshold into a foreign territory, symbolic of my trip to/from China.  The texts become more exaggerated and personal, "Outgoing" vs "Withdrawn", "Foreigner" vs "Local", things like that...there is suggestion that Square does not really know what it is at this point.  Animus/a shows its own split and becomes more talkative and distressed.

During the final stretch of puzzles where the mechanics are at their most complex/punishing, the text becomes more abstract and larger, dealing with not only the journey but your destination itself, leading up to the split between dreamer and burnout.

Finally, there is a very large chasm, reminiscent of when you started the game.  The text is very obvious about the message, with "SUCCESS" just out of reach - as you jump, "JOURNEY" pops up, but when you jump again, you fall short of SUCCESS and drop down into...you guessed it...FAILURE.  Also, HOME.

Animus/a speaks to you one last time, driving home the idea that out of all the ideas brought up, the one thing that has been consistent with your identity was the drive to the end, to reach the destination - but now, in fact, it seems you have not actually gone anywhere at all, so this has been an illusion as well.

You literally are dropped back onto the area you started on, so Animus/a is literally correct - you have gone nowhere.  However, this time you do have the double-jump, so if you go to the game's original starting point and double-jump to the left, you can trigger a more "real" ending.


